## Jonpaul Wright Capstone Proposals

#### Proposal A
**The Question:**  
Can I find good value in public Vegas betting lines for the NFL, specifically on the team level?  Vegas has two basic lines for each game: whether Team A will beat Team B (the "moneyline") and whether the difference in the final score will be above or below a set margin (the "spread").  I would also like to explore season-long propositions, such as win-total Over/Unders.

**The Approach:**  
I have a large database of NFL data that I've accrued and constructed over the past decade.  I would like to use it to inspect Vegas lines for the last 25-50 years (I have a second database that extends only to 1989, currently, hence the 25 years) and see if I can find a 'hidden' trend or tell which will allow me to ferret out good value in betting.  There are multiple aspects to this, including various advanced composite metrics as well as the more granular ones.  Various traditional factors in determining the line include day of the week the game is played, location (home v. away), time of day, the teams' win-loss records, the teams' recent performances (recency bias!), and whether or not they are a "public" team, a gambling term denoting that they are viewed highly by the general (i.e. uninformed) betting public.  I think there is a (very) good chance using the databases I have I can do better than those traditional attributes allow in predicting lines.  There are two primary results I would want achieve from this capstone: First, to determine if there are certain Vegas lines which are routinely inefficient, and what the lines *should* be.  Second, to predict with better than random chance whether Team A will beat Team B.  

**The Reason:**  
I've never gambled a cent in my life, even at a one-armed bandit.  I have come close to laying a wager on a certain team's Over/Under for their season's win total a couple times.  I was right both times and should have.  I would have made good money.  The reason I want to do this is so I can retire to a freshly-purchased tropical island where I will manage my off-shore gambling empire from my lone MacBook Pro -- now equipped with a solar panel for charging -- while beautiful, scantly clad indigenous woman using coconut shells for bras prance around me and generously feed me grapes they've individually plucked from the vine and pouring sweet rum salvaged from shipwrecks off the coast of our little secluded atoll.  They will also love American football, a sport they've never heard of from a country they've never visited.

Also, I really love the NFL and want to learn more about it apart from Vegas' betting lines.  I have a lengthy history of digging into the NFL from an analytical perspective, and am very familiar with the subject matter, giving me easy intuition into how to approach the problem as well as make sense of conclusions found.  I would do this project on my own, so why not dive into it fully as my capstone?  


**The Bonus:**  
I really enjoy making visualizations and am confident I can come up with some illustrative and appealing visualizations.  I'm quite excited about this.  I'd like to make a blog/site about NFL teams, history, etc. in a sort of "online history book" that is interactive and updated and features great op-ed pieces by yours truly, in which I analyze key moments, teams, players, and games from each season.  The women won't be able to keep their hands off me once they see that, right?!


#### Proposal B  
Still dealing with the NFL, but this time focusing on health and Money Ball.  It would be interesting to analyze health as it correlates to various outcomes, such as career length, career earnings, litigation, and healthcare cost post-career.  However, I haven't any of this data whatsoever, nor do I know exactly how I would get some of it.  Concussions, for example, weren't reported or listed with any regularity before about ~8 years ago.  Also, I am not nearly as motivated for this project, just thought it would be an interesting thing to look at off the cuff.  It would be neat to take a Money Ball approach and see if 1) injuries are even remotely predictable, e.g. a player with an injury history in college is more prone to *different* injuries in the pros?  We could also attempt to assign an estimated cost to a certain type of injury, both in expected wins and in salary cap percentage. A potentially neat idea would be to scour team news outlets, team-specific journalists, and twitter to see if we could somehow predict an injury based on reports of general health, conditioning, and even training camp performance.  Possibly futile, but maybe fun.   

Further Money Ball approaches would look at teams who found inefficiencies in the player market based upon the average salary of a certain position were able to have success.  For example, as the league continues its rule-aided procession towards an ever-increasing pro-passing state, defenses have 'had' to adapt by becoming slimmer and faster at the back 7 positions, with a 'trickle down' effect being observed as players who used to be (strong) safeties now being used primarily as linebackers as formerly situation-specific nickel-defenses become the norm to provide athletic flexibility in pass coverage.  So, players that fit these currently 'trendy' positions will be overvalued, and players who fit roles not currently *en vogue* will be undervalued.  Can a smart GM construct a roster based on undervalued players and have a coach scheme effectively with players who play positions other teams don't value highly at the moment?  Etc.  Fun questions, but I don't want to do this compared to Proposal A.


### Proposal C
I have made a list of other ideas as the course has gone on.  I don't want to do any of these, truly, but some of them are neat and might be cool ideas:

+ Analyze food ingredient lists for a correlation with price, projected/labeled 'health', local availability in neighborhoods and how that corresponds to income, etc.  Expected findings aren't revolutionary but would be good to quantify as well maybe identify certain unexpected ingredients or food 'types' that are clearly being used as low-cost fillers/replacements and their likely poor health outcomes.  Speaking of, expand this to find which ingredients correspond to poorer health (increased doctor visits? increased insurance cost? insurance filings? self-reported exercise frequency? gym membership activity?).  I'm a health guy, and after reading "Salt, Sugar, Fat" I am decidedly appalled at "Big Food" and the utter corruption and profiteering which comes at the expense of our nation's health, and subsequently our tax dollars.  

+ Investigate unwed / unwanted child birth and how it correlates to age, financial outcomes, educational achievement of both parent and child, psychological well-being, and crime.  Also inspect how access to abortion in a given area affects these outcomes.  Tough part is getting the data to be accurate on 'wanted' v. 'unwanted' pregnancies.  Many people will falsely self-report (if asked) that a pregnancy was wanted in order to avoid causing shame or conflict for the child.  The best baseline metric would be whether a couple was married or not nine months before the birth, however even married couples might disagree on 'intent' as the husband could not have wanted it but the wife secretly did, etc.  
+ Investigate traffic flow, patterns, wrecks, fuel usage, time lost to drivers, and how to improve these factors.  Unsure of how you'd get the data, but my first thought would be a mix of official reported data, such as wrecks, and satellite imagery as well as modern navigation phone apps to determine traffic congestion and time lost, as well as fuel usage.  Probably should use more roundabouts....  

+ The Horned Frog (aka Horny Toad) is a beloved animal in much of Texas.  According to the Dallas Zoo, which has been tracking the blood-squirting creatures, there is a gradual but possibly alarming decline in Horny Toad population in Texas.  I've no clue what data they've made available, or is available elsewhere, but I think it would be a neat project to investigate and possibly try to offer some fundamental explanations for the exodus.  First hunch: climate change is causing the species to relocate, or even impacting its ability to survive as-is.  Second hunch: urban sprawl is reducing previously safe environments for the animal, though in Texas there is no shortage of wide open land.  

+ Freight ships -- the massive barges which carry cargo in huge 18-wheeler containers cruise all over the world in exceptional numbers.  Their fuel usage is believed to be an enormous contributor to climate change, and their paths could be optimized to reduce this, as well as cost.  Lower shipping cost = lower consumer cost for consumer goods.  One problem is that there are different laws governing different countries regarding shipping, ships, and how they can handle cargo.  These all affect the cargo shipping industry and might be ripe for optimization.  Machine Learning could be employed regarding weather, seasonality of crowded ports, etc. to optimize shipping as well.
